We all have that friend, don’t we..? We
will be talking to him. For a long while..
And then, something, suddenly will occur to
us.. Is he even listening to me?! We would
ask them. Hey, were you even listening? And
then, they will immediately adopt the strategy
of repeating the last-heard sentences and
try to prove that they indeed were! They will
parrot our sentences. Like a recorded tape.
That is not listening! That is hearing! Says
Simon Sinek. We have met him earlier too.
He says, “Listening is an art! It is not
involving just the ears. If you are able to
repeat what you heard, it just means that
your ears are working fine. That’s all!
But there are many more organs involved in
the art of listening! There has to be eye
contact! Occasionally, your mouth should work
and play the role of encouraging the speaker!
You need to understand what was spoken, with
the help of your brain! THAT is listening!
They have even giving it a term! The LOST
ART of Listening! That is what we are going
to talk about today!
Namaste! Active Listening! They have called
it a LOST ART! How do we get that back? How
do we become a good listener? (Which, people
say, is an important foundation to become
a good communicator!) How do we LISTEN? How
do we pay ATTENTION? Let’s collect some
wisdom!
Many researchers have found out that there
is a fundamental reason why we are not good
listeners! For, .. our brain is much much
much more powerful and hence faster than this
speaking organ called the mouth. There is
a person in front of you. Even if they do
an amazing job of speaking, even if they are
communicating something very very important,
the words come out only at a specific rate.
Not more than a hundred words a minute or
so. But, our ability to process, our ability
to process multiple things, “What’s that
noise there?”, we are distracted, “What’s
that bright light there?”, “What’s this
strange sensation on my skin?”, everything
is being processed simultaneously. So, frankly
speaking, we can’t be blamed. We have to
blame just our brains. For, this is how you
think, while that is how they can speak. They
call it the Tortoise — Hare Situation. Whenever
something fast is happening, if we try and
connect a patently slow thing with it, of
course the fast-one will be distracted! If
you remember the Hare and the Tortoise story,
isn’t that what happened there too? Only
because the Hare was perhaps BORED that the
competition was nowhere to be seen, he went
to sleep! Distracted! So, don’t be too hard
on yourself!
Her name is Marilyn Vos Savant. She holds
a record. The highest IQ score EVER, by anybody!
She reached that score at the age 10. A score
of 228! And, after that, she has attempted
it multiple times too, and has consistently
been rated the smartest person on the planet.
228! But, you know what? Researchers say,
if you are smart, if you are creative, if
you are imaginative, by nature, you may not
be a great listener. For, to listen well,
you shouldn’t allow the horse of your imagination
gallop unbridled! You can’t dream on and
on about other alternatives, other scenarios,
all the time! You have to POUR YOURSELF into
the act. Very creative, smart people, are
not able to do that. There is another matter
too. These introverts? The ones who don’t
talk much? It is a myth that such people are
great listeners! Not so! Just because they
don’t talk much doesn’t mean they listen
well. Research has shown. I am not saying
it!
There is a book like this. You’re Not Listening!
By Kate Murphy. What you’re missing, and
why it matters. In this book, I encountered
a very beautiful excerpt, and I wanted to
share that with you. That excerpt says, “Listening
is to be likened to an act of Meditation!
Take any book about meditation, go to any
guru, and they’d all say one thing. One
very important thing. Distractions WILL happen.
Don’t try to shoo them away. Don’t try
to say that you won’t see them, you won’t
listen to them, you won’t touch them, you
won’t mind them.. It is impossible! It is
impossible to control the Mind Monkey. You
will waver! Give in to that temptation. And,
after you given in, and after the distraction
blows over, bring that monkey back in, focus
again. Beginners in meditation almost always
get this bit of advice only, again and again.
They will never be told to JUST FOCUS on ONE
THING. For, that is impossible! All they’d
say is, you have to acknowledge that there
is a distraction, treat it with respect, push
it away once it clamours and gets that attention,
push it away, focus back again. Keep coming
back!” Kate Murphy says, this is exactly
what you need to practice during listening
too.
There’s another thing she shares — a quote
by Stephen Covey. “Most people do not listen
with the intent to understand; they listen
with the intent to reply”. When will I get
the mic? When will you
stop talking so that I can… This is the
mentality that we need to change — says
Stephen Covey.
There is an amazing dancer — her name is
Monica Bill Barnes. She is a presenter, she
is a communicator. She is a communicator with
her body! She has said something about the
Art of Listening. Poetic. Highly relevant.
She says, “Listening is a matter of you
deciding you don’t need to worry what to
say next! Take it in without worrying how
you are going to react, what words you are
going to use. THAT is the pinnacle of listening.
That is what allows someone else’s opinions
to temporarily take hold of your soul. Enter
its every atom. BECOME YOU for a while. Allow
your whole soul, your intellect, your ALL,
to be impacted a bit,.. and then you can drive
it away. But, allow it in. Allow it to get
past your border defences. Stop obsessing
and fearing about what you are going to say
next! It requires a lot of trust. The speaker
has to trust the listener. The listener has
to trust the speaker.”
I saw this famous book. It was called “Listen
like you mean it” by Ximena Vengoechea.
She talks about eleven different types of
listeners! Eleven categories! Let us look
at each of them, quickly. Decide for yourselves,
what type YOU are!
Category Number One. This guy is The Explainer.
You talk about any situation, “Oh, is that
so, did your boss shout at you, are you at
risk of losing your job, you know why, you
must have done this, he must have felt like
that, of course that is why this is happening,
let us analyse, let us draw a blueprint, let
us put an action plan, and this is why that
is happening, do you remember that? do you
remember that dotted line from there? And
that other incident that happened the other
day at office?” He is The Explainer. A rational,
scientific explanation for everything. The
problem is, we don’t want explanations sometimes.
We don’t want everything broken down and
analysed as a sequence of events! The speaker
might think, “I don’t want to listen to
that lecture from you!” Sometimes! So, The
Explainer is a good role, but careful, don’t
over-explain!
The Second Role is The Validator. What does
HE do? “Oh, you’ve lost your job? I understand.
I completely do. That guy is ALWAYS like that.
I knew something like this would happen. Every
person who comes from that town? They are
ALL the same. They behave just like this.
Anybody who passes out of that college with
that degree, they act as if…” They validate.
They resonate. They take your side. They become
a cheerleader. The problem is, .. yes, there
are benefits. You will feel, “Oh, wow, I
have company. Somebody understands”. But
the problem is, it will boost your ego. You
may have lost your job because of a mistake
you made, but you may still end up thinking
you are the best employee ever, and you can
commit NO MISTAKES! So, The Validator, Type
Number Two.
Type Number Three is The Identifier. The Identifier..
“Oh, you’ve lost your job? Oh… Guess
what happened? Last time? Just two years ago,
man. I went through the same thing. And, you
know what happened? The boss called me. He
sent me a mail. He said, I hadn’t done…”
You take over. Yes, you identified with that
person. You said, “I am here to commiserate!”
But, you took over. And the game changed to
YOU being the victim. You started reliving
YOUR PAST. The other guy is feeling “Hey,
I am crying here. Look at me. Give me attention!”
So, The Identifier is useful, but sometimes,
the person who started the conversation, will
get the feeling, “Hey, Is it always about
you? Is the whole world spinning around you
perhaps? I exist too, man!” That would be
a problem!
The next type is The Problem Solver. I am
sure you all can relate to this guy. He is
the Problem Solver. The Problem Solver always
look at any conversation as a situation. A
problem waiting for a solution. An action
plan. An implementation. “Oh, you’ve lost
your job? Hmm.. Okay, that’s alright. Come
on now. Let us create a profile in Naukri.com.
Tell me about your… Have you updated your
resume? Okay, bring your resume… What is
this.. Let us change it..” Biased towards
action. But, there is a problem there too.
Sometimes, there MAY BE no problem at all!
It may just be a perception! Our Problem Solver
is going to dish out six different solutions
to a NON-EXISTENT problem! Sometimes, the
Speaker just wants a Listener! Not a problem
solver. So, be judicious about that!
This person is The Nurse. Who is a Nurse?
My problems, my needs, my demands on time,
my health, my need and desire for love and
affection, I push all of those away, and say,
“You are the center of my attention. I will
do everything for you. I will go the extra
mile. I will take your problems as mine. I
am here to help you!” So, “Oh, you’ve
lost your job? Hmm… (Calls mom…and says
“Amma, I won’t be coming home tonight.
I have to be there with him. The next two
days, don’t expect me back at home….”)
Hey, come on, I will take care of you. Do
you want any money now?” He takes the problem.
He becomes part of your.. the army that supports
you. But, sometimes, particularly when trust
hasn’t been established up front, it tips
the balance… The speaker starts wondering,
“Hey, I am already regretting every passing
moment, angry at how the world is treating
me. Now, by helping me so much, by doing so
much good Karma, you are adding the burden
of… oh my god, I have another person to
pay back some day?…” Do you see the problem
there? So, that balance shouldn’t tip too
much. You give. You take. Probably give more
than you take. But, don’t give your ALL.
Don’t be The Nurse. He has to stand on his
own legs. So, help him. But, don’t hold
him aloft, above your head. Be the crutch.
Not the bus!
This guy is pretty dangerous. He is called
The Defuser. The Defuser… okay, everybody
is kind and good-hearted of course, but The
Defuser approaches the situation thus. Any
problems, they try to make them disappear
with probably levity or joking. “Oh, you’ve
lost your job? Oh, that boss? That skinhead
dimwit? Why are you even working with such
goodfornothings? Now is your chance. Come
on. Let us go! Remember that trip we had been
planning for a long long time? To Goa? Hop
in! Let’s go!” Joking, levity, pooh-poohing
the problem away, suspending reality and the
truth, the gravity of the situation, … all
this may sound good. Make great scripts for
movies.. but when you come back, after the
hangover, the situation would only have gotten
worse! Some Defusers work even more rashly!
“Oh, you’ve lost your job? Give me your
phone! Isn’t he the guy? Let me make a prank
call to him. Hey, nincompoop! What sorta arrogant
bullshit is this?” Do you understand what’s
happening here? That’s not how you defuse
a situation.
This guy is The Mediator. This guy thinks
there are two sides for everything. He knows
it. “Oh, you’ve lost your job? Oh, that
boss? I don’t he would do that unprovoked…
Did you do anything wrong? Shall I talk to
him? There has to be another side to this.
Why don’t we have an open conversation?
What do you think? Did you screw up? Think
hard.. I have experience with that person..”
That would be the line of argument The Mediator
would take. The Speaker would think, “I
am already boiling here. And you are trying
to play from the opposite side of the table?
Just because you believe in some golden righteous
rule, unwavering middle path? Are you being
a friend here or a judge? But, that’s the
role of the mediator! If you are a Mediator-kind
of a listener, right when the other person
is speaking, you’ll start thinking, “This
has happened to this guy only because this
guy did this thing like this”.
This person is The Empath. The person who
showers empathy and smothers you with love
and support. In fact, you may be keeping silent!
Not wanting to tell anybody. “Why are you
looking off today? Something wrong. What happened?
Tell me, come on, come on, tell me. What?
I hope you haven’t lost your job or something
like that!?” They start feeding information,
so that they can fish information. Because
they sense, they are hypersensitive… But,
even here, unless you have that bridge of
trust between the two of you, you may be crossing
the line, if you act as an Empath. Careful
about that!
This guy, he is The Interrupter! Look at this
picture.. Who’s talking, who’s listening?
There seems to be no dialogue! Only intersecting
monologues! Both are talking! Probably the
lady is TRYING to say something, and the guy
is FINISHING her sentences! “What? You’ve
lost your job?” That guy is starting to
respond, “That manager, he had given me
a…” And The Interrupter interjects “That
project, yes? I knew it!” Is this how you
empathise with somebody who is telling about
their worst time in life? By interrupting
and trying to show your smartness and your
ability to sense? Sometimes, there are people
who listen by interrupting. I got your problem.
I know it now. Come on. Let’s move on!
This guy, is The Interviewer. He is asking
questions ALL THE TIME. “What? You’ve
lost your job? When was this? What time did
it happen? Which project was this? What dress
were you wearing that day? Had that guy come
too? Was this other guy there too?” You
ask too many questions and you fragment the
narrative that the other person is trying
to get across to you. There seems to be a
WORD to represent such questioners. The Askhole!
An Askhole is a person who asks too many questions!
They will suck the living daylights out of
you just by shooting question after question
at you! The Askhole! Don’t be the Askhole!
This guy, probably the last of the eleven,
is The Daydreamer. Dreaming all the time.
That lady there is shouting at the top of
her voice. Belting out story after story.
Listing issues. Crying that she lost her job.
And, they are giving you some instructions,
they are giving you some expectations. But,
you have already tuned out. You are probably
dreaming about… The speaker might have spilt
just a word.. “I have lost my job. I just
want to run away somewhere. Get away from
it all.” That’s it. This guy has already
booked tickets to Hawaii. Probably rented
out an island, a boat, and probably planned
for a dance there. That i s The Daydreamer.
The creative, imaginative person. Eleven different
kinds of people. Why did we even learn about
them all? This understanding may help you
to evaluate yourself. What kind of listener
am I? What is my default? What do I typically
end up doing? That will help. Secondly, when
speaking, if you can identify this in your
listener… “Oh, this person is becoming
an interrupting listener, .. this person doesn’t
mean ill. But, that’s the way they are..”
To learn is to understand. To understand is
to forgive! Useful again!
As a closing thought, this guy. I want to
introduce him to you. His name is Julian Treasure.
What a name! Julian TREASURE! We will be meeting
him again, in a future Quotidian. But, he
has spoken in two TED platforms. The first
one is about “How to speak so that people
want to listen”. But, a couple of years
before that, he gave another TED Talk “How
to listen better”. How to speak better,
how to listen better. Look at the numbers!
34 million people want to speak so that others
will listen. Only 4 million people want to
listen better. This is the problem with this
world, says Julian. Let more people practice
the art of active listening! All the best.
Hope you listened to this well, it has dragged
on longer than usual, but there were eleven
categories I had to cover. We will meet soon.
Till then, thank you!